After an operating system is generated, it must be made available for use by the hardware. The *process of starting a computer by loading the kernel is known as booting* the system. On most systems, the boot process proceeds as follows:

1. A small piece of code known as the bootstrap program or boot loader locates the kernel.
2. The kernel is loaded into memory and started.
3. The kernel initializes hardware.
4. The root file system is mounted.

Some computer systems use a multistage boot process: When the computer is first powered on, a small boot loader located in nonvolatile firmware known as **BIOS** is run. This initial boot loader usually does nothing more than load a second boot loader, which is located at a fixed disk location called the boot block. The program stored in the boot block may be sophisticated enough to load the entire operating system into memory and begin its execution.

Many recent computer systems have replaced the BIOS-based boot process with **UEFI (Unified Extensible Firmware Interface)**. UEFI has several advantages over BIOS, including better support for 64-bit systems and larger disks.

Whether booting from BIOS or UEFI, the bootstrap program can perform a variety of tasks. In addition to loading the file containing the kernel program into memory, it also runs diagnostics to determine the state of the machine —for example, inspecting memory and the CPU and discovering devices. If the diagnostics pass, the program can continue with the booting steps. The bootstrap can also initialize all aspects of the system, from CPU registers to device controllers and the contents of main memory. Sooner or later, it starts the operating system and mounts the root file system. It is only at this point is the system said to be running.

**GRUB** is an open-source bootstrap program for Linux and UNIX systems. Boot parameters for the system are set in a GRUB configuration file, which is loaded at startup. GRUB is flexible and allows changes to be made at boot time, including modifying kernel parameters and even selecting among different kernels that can be booted.

To save space as well as decrease boot time, the Linux kernel image is a compressed file that is extracted after it is loaded into memory. During the boot process, the boot loader typically creates a temporary RAM file system, known as `initramfs`. This file system contains necessary drivers and kernel modules that must be installed to support the *real* root file system (which is not in main memory). Once the kernel has started and the necessary drivers are installed, the kernel switches the root file system from the temporary RAM location to the appropriate root file system location. Finally, Linux creates the `systemd` process, the initial process in the system, and then starts other services (for example, a web server and/or database). Ultimately, the system will present the user with a login prompt.

The boot process for mobile systems is slightly different. For example, although its kernel is Linux-based, Android does not use GRUB and instead leaves it up to vendors to provide boot loaders. The most common Android boot loader is LK (for “little kernel”). Android systems use the same compressed kernel image as Linux, as well as an initial RAM file system. However, whereas Linux discards the `initramfs` once all necessary drivers have been loaded, Android maintains `initramfs` as the root file system for the device. Once the kernel has been loaded and the root file system mounted, Android starts the `init` process and creates a number of services before displaying the home screen.

Finally, boot loaders for most operating systems—including Windows, Linux, and macOS, as well as both iOS and Android—provide booting into *recovery mode* or *single-user mode* for diagnosing hardware issues, fixing corrupt file systems, and even reinstalling the operating system.
