
##### 2.6.1 The Select Operation
The select operation selects tuples that satisfy a given predicate. We use the lowercase Greek letter sigma (σ) to denote selection. To find the instructors in Physics with a salary greater than $90,000, we write:
	                       `σ dept name = “Physics” ∧ salary>90000 (instructor)`


##### 2.6.2 The Project Operation
The project operation is a unary operation that returns its argument relation, with certain attributes left out. Since a relation is a set, any duplicate rows are eliminated. Projection is denoted by the uppercase Greek letter pi (Π). 
                                          `Π ID, name, salary(instructor)`


##### 2.6.5 The Join Operation
The join operation allows us to combine a selection and a Cartesian product into a single operation. Consider relations r(R) and s(S), and let θ be a predicate on attributes in the schema R ∪ S. The join operation r ⋈θ s is defined as follows:

                                                   `r ⋈θ s = σθ(r × s)`

Thus, `σ instructor.ID = teaches.ID(instructor × teaches)` can equivalently be written as `instructor ⋈instructor.ID = teaches.ID teaches` .


##### 2.6.6 Set Operations
Consider a query to find the set of all courses taught in the Fall 2017 semester, the Spring 2018 semester, or both. To answer the query, we need the union of these two sets;
In general, for a union operation to make sense:

1. We must ensure that the input relations to the union operation have the same number of attributes; the number of attributes of a relation is referred to as its **arity**.
2. When the attributes have associated types, the types of the i-th attributes of both input relations must be the same, for each i.

Such relations are referred to as *compatible relations*.


The intersection operation, denoted by `∩` , allows us to find tuples that are in both the input relations. The expression `r ∩ s` produces a relation containing those tuples in r as well as in s. As with the union operation, we must ensure that intersection is done between compatible relations.

The set-difference operation, denoted by `-` , allows us to find tuples that are in one relation but are not in another. The expression `r - s` produces a relation containing those tuples in r but not in s. The set differences are taken between compatible relations.


##### 2.6.7 The Assignment Operation
It is convenient at times to write a relational-algebra expression by assigning parts of it to temporary relation variables. The assignment operation, denoted by `←` , works like assignment in a programming language.
`courses fall 2017 ← Π course id(σ semester = “Fall”∧ year=2017 (section))`
`courses spring 2018 ← Π course id(σ semester = “Spring” ∧ year=2018 (section))`
`courses fall 2017 ∩ courses spring 2018`


##### 2.6.8 The Rename Operation
Unlike relations in the database, the results of relational-algebra expressions do not have a name that we can use to refer to them. It is useful in some cases to give them names; the rename operator, denoted by the lowercase Greek letter rho (ρ), lets us do this. Given a relational-algebra expression E, the expression:
                                                                   `ρ x(E)`
returns the result of expression E under the name x.

A second form of the rename operation is as follows: Assume that a relational algebra    expression E has arity n. Then, the expression
                                                        `ρ x(A1,A2,…,An)(E)`
returns the result of expression E under the name x, and with the attributes renamed to A 1, A2, … , An.
