For a computer to start running—for instance, when it is powered up or rebooted—it needs to have an initial program to run. As noted earlier, this initial program, or *bootstrap program*, tends to be simple. Typically, it is stored within the computer hardware in firmware. It initializes all aspects of the system, from CPU registers to device controllers to memory contents. The bootstrap program must know how to load the operating system and how to start executing that system. To accomplish this goal, the bootstrap program must *locate the operating-system kernel and load it into memory*.

Once the kernel is loaded and executing, it can start providing services to the system and its users. Some services are provided outside of the kernel by system programs that are loaded into memory at boot time to become **system daemons**, which run the entire time the kernel is running. On Linux, the first system program is `systemd` and it starts many other daemons. Once this phase is complete, the system is fully booted, and the system waits for some event to occur.

If there are no processes to execute, no I/O devices to service, and no users to whom to respond, an operating system will sit quietly, waiting for something to happen. Events are almost always signaled by the occurrence of an interrupt. Another form of [interrupt]([[1.2.1 Interrupts]]) is a **trap** (or an **exception**), which is a software-generated interrupt caused either by an error (for example, division by zero or invalid memory access) or by a specific request from a user program that an operating-system service be performed by executing a special operation called a **system call**.