One of the most important aspects of operating systems is the ability to run multiple programs, as a single program cannot, in general, keep either the CPU or the I/O devices busy at all times. Multiprogramming increases CPU utilization, as well as keeping users satisfied, by organizing programs so that the CPU always has one to execute. In a multiprogrammed system, a program in execution is termed a **process**.

The operating system keeps several processes in memory simultaneously. The OS picks and begins to execute one of these processes. Eventually, the process may have to wait for some task, such as an I/O operation, to complete. In a multiprogrammed system, the OS simply switches to, and executes, another process. When that process needs to wait, the CPU switches to another process, and so on. Eventually, the first process finishes waiting and gets the CPU back. 

Multitasking is a logical extension of multiprogramming. In multitasking systems, the CPU executes multiple processes by switching among them, *but the switches occur frequently*, providing the user with a fast response time. Input, for example, may be bounded by the user’s typing speed; seven characters per second is fast for people but incredibly slow for computers. Rather than let the CPU sit idle as this interactive input takes place, the OS will rapidly switch the CPU to another process.

Having several processes in memory at the same time requires some form of memory management, and if several processes are ready to run at the same time, the system must choose which process will run next. Making this decision is **CPU scheduling**. Finally, running multiple processes concurrently requires that their ability to affect one another be limited in all phases of the operating system, including process scheduling, disk storage, and memory management. 

In a multitasking system, the operating system must ensure reasonable response time. A common method for doing so is **virtual memory**, a technique that allows the execution of a process that is not completely in memory. The main advantage of this scheme is that it enables users to run programs that are larger than actual **physical memory**. Further, it abstracts main memory into a large, uniform array of storage, separating **logical memory** as viewed by the user from physical memory. This arrangement frees programmers from concern over memory-storage limitations.

Multiprogramming and multitasking systems must also provide a file system which resides on a secondary storage; hence, storage management must be provided. In addition, a system must protect resources from inappropriate use. To ensure orderly execution, the system must also provide mechanisms for process synchronization and communication, and it may ensure that processes do not get stuck in a deadlock, forever waiting for one another.