Fundamentally, applications compiled on one operating system are not executable on other operating systems.

- At the application level, the libraries provided with the OS contain APIs to provide features like GUI interfaces, and an application designed to call one set of APIs (say, those available from iOS) will not work on an OS that does not provide those APIs (such as Android)
- Each OS has a binary format for applications that dictates the layout of the header, instructions, and variables. Those components need to be at certain locations in specified structures within an executable file so the OS can open the file and load the application for proper execution.
- CPUs have varying instruction sets, and only applications containing the appropriate instructions can execute correctly.
- Operating systems provide system calls that allow applications to request various activities, such as creating files and opening network connections. Those system calls vary among operating systems in many respects, including the specific operands and operand ordering used.

An application can be made available to run on multiple operating systems in one of three ways:
1. he application can be written in an interpreted language (such as Python or Ruby) that has an interpreter available for multiple operating systems. The interpreter reads each line of the source program, executes equivalent instructions on the native instruction set, and calls native operating system calls.
2. The application can be written in a language that includes a virtual machine containing the running application. The virtual machine is part of the language’s full RTE. One example of this method is Java. This RTE has been ported, or developed, for many operating systems and in theory any Java app can run within the RTE wherever it is available.
3. The application developer can use a standard language or API in which the compiler generates binaries in a machine- and operating-system- specific language. The application must be ported to each operating system on which it will run. This porting can be quite time consuming and must be done for each new version of the application, with subsequent testing and debugging.
4. APIs specify certain functions at the application level. At the architecture level, an **application binary interface (ABI)** is used to define how different components of binary code can interface for a given operating system on a given architecture. An ABI specifies low-level details, including address width, methods of passing parameters to system calls,  the binary format of system libraries. Typically, an ABI is specified for a given architecture. Thus, an *ABI is the architecture-level equivalent of an API*. If a binary executable file has been compiled and linked according to a particular ABI, it should be able to run on different systems that support that ABI.