- An operating system provides an environment for the execution of programs by providing services to users and programs.

- The three primary approaches for interacting with an operating system are (1) command interpreters, (2) graphical user interfaces, and (3) touchscreen interfaces.

- System calls provide an interface to the services made available by an operating system. Programmers use a system call’s API for accessing system-call services.

- System calls can be divided into six major categories: (1) process control, (2) file management, (3) device management, (4) information maintenance, (5) communications, and (6) protection.

- The standard C library provides the system-call interface for UNIX and Linux systems.

- Operating systems also include a collection of system programs that provide utilities to users.

- A linker combines several relocatable object modules into a single binary executable file. A loader loads the executable file into memory, where it becomes eligible to run on an available CPU.

- There are several reasons why applications are operating-system specific. These include different binary formats for program executables, different instruction sets for different CPUs, and system calls that vary from one OS to another.

- An operating system is designed with specific goals in mind. These goals ultimately determine the operating system’s policies. An operating system implements these policies through specific mechanisms.

- A monolithic operating system has no structure; all functionality is provided in a single, static binary file that runs in a single address space. 

- A layered operating system is divided into a number of discrete layers, where the bottom layer is the hardware interface and the highest layer is the user interface. 

- The microkernel approach for designing operating systems uses a minimal kernel; most services run as user-level applications. Communication takes place via message passing.

- A modular approach for designing operating systems provides OS services through modules that can be loaded and removed during run time. Many contemporary operating systems are constructed as hybrid systems using a combination of a monolithic kernel and modules.

- A boot loader loads an operating system into memory, performs initialization, and begins system execution.

- The performance of an operating system can be monitored using either counters or tracing. Counters are a collection of system-wide or per-process statistics, while tracing follows the execution of a program through the operating system.